Please welcome Brett Halle,
Director of Core OS Engineering.
Good afternoon.
We're going to spend a little bit
of time today and talk about Darwin.
Darwin is the bottom layer of Mac OS X.
If you're interested in
focusing a little bit on the
plumbing and that kind of stuff,
this is the right place to be.
Darwin is the powerful,
open source foundation of Mac OS X.
I think this picture actually
kind of really misrepresents
the importance of Darwin,
so let's see.
Ah, that's better.
I think that's a little bit better.
Like I said, Darwin really is kind of the
bottom layer of Mac OS X.
It's the foundation upon
which the system is built.
We're going to spend a little
bit of time in this session and
give you a really brief overview
of what the technologies are,
although probably most of you
know what those things are,
but we want to spend a little bit
more time and tell you a little bit
about what we've been doing as far as
Jaguar is concerned and the kinds of
services and facilities that you'll
want to be able to take advantage of.
Like I said,
you really need to think of the
Core OS and Darwin as really
the foundation of the building.
All the rest of
Mac OS X sits on top of it.
It supports all the frameworks and all
the other stuff that make up the system.
A lot of our job is to really be as
invisible as possible to everybody,
because we are that plumbing in the
walls and the stuff on the bottom.
For Jaguar,
we've been doing a bit of digging
of some things up and putting
in some new plumbing and stuff.
We'll talk a little bit about some of
the new plumbing work we've been doing.
Hopefully,
you'll find this to be pretty exciting.
First, let's start with Mach.
Mach is the actual base, if you will,
of Mac OS X.
It's responsible for managing
all the processor resources and
memory resources of the system.
Architecturally,
you might consider Mach as a microkernel,
but the way we've built
it into the system,
it's very highly integrated into
the rest of the kernel environment.
Its job really is to be able
to be a policy-neutral layer
of the system to manage the
processor and memory resources.
What's really important to note
about Mach and why it is important
to the people in this room is that
everything else is built on top of Mach.
All the process models that exist in the
system are fundamentally built on top
of Mach's concepts of tasks and threads.
And that all memory management in
the system is built on top of Mach.
All the kind of backing store management,
the actual handling of virtual memory and
paging is all ultimately handled by Mach.
And all the communication between
processes and between the user land
applications in the kernel are primarily
built on top of Mach primitives.
So it's important to realize
that these are really pretty
important building blocks,
and you'll see bits and
pieces of Mach kind of expose
itself through other services.
And you'll see bits and pieces of
Mach that are all the way up into
things like CF network and above.
So it's important to realize that
this is a key part of the system.
For Mac, on top of Mac,
or tightly integrated with Mac,
is the BSD Kernel.
This is really what
provides the OS personality,
if you will, for the system.
This is where policy is actually
brought into the picture.
For us, this Mac Kernel is based
on the BSD 4.4 Lite,
plus we've spent quite a bit of time
integrating it with Mac and I/O Kit,
our IO system.
It provides a higher level
view of the process model,
handling things like signals and resource
reaping and other things of that nature.
It also introduces some of the mechanism
for handling some of the system security,
by having a concept of
users and being able to,
through the file system and
other parts of the system,
enforce various forms of
ownership and permissions.
As I mentioned,
it really is responsible for
providing the OS personality,
if you will, of the system.
All of the high-level APIs for the OS are
ultimately exported through the BSD APIs.
For Jaguar,
we've done a number of interesting
things down at the low-level kernel.
One is we've done some interesting
changing with how we handle panics.
One of those things you should,
of course, rarely ever see.
But if you happen to be developing
a drive or something like that
and something goes haywire,
well, the system will panic.
And you've probably seen with the
existing 10.1 system that it splashes
a whole bunch of stuff on the screen,
at which point you have to sit
there with a pencil and paper and
jot it all down because there's
actually useful information in there.
Well, one of the things we've done
with Jaguar is actually capture
all the state of a panic.
And this information gets stored away and
saved across the reboot of the system.
The next time the system is booted,
as long as it wasn't powered down,
it will actually collect the...
the panic state information,
and this actually gets logged
into the crash catcher application
that's part of Mac OS X.
At which point, then,
you can just cut and paste,
which is certainly a lot more enjoyable.
And hopefully,
if you unfortunately find a bug of ours,
you can just cut and paste that
and send it off as a bug report.
We've also done a bit of work
in the kernel with processor
scheduling improvements,
particularly in multiple
CPU environments,
so that there's now the ability...
Right now... As of... Today,
you can... The kernel is
preemptible at multiple levels,
and we've added additional capability
in multiple CPU environments
for there to be cross-processor
preemption signaling to occur,
as well as to start
introducing some mechanisms for
supporting processor affinity,
so that efficient action of executing
thread doesn't end up getting
moved from processor to processor
and losing all the cache state.
In the VM system,
there's been some pretty... Yeah.
exciting stuff,
as far as performance work is concerned.
And two primary things.
One is what we call an
application... Basically,
an adaptive application profile.
And what ends up happening is,
is when an application is
launched on the system,
the kernel actually pays
attention to the VM activity
during that particular process,
and effectively snapshots, you know,
a profile of what occurred
during the launch.
And the next time you
launch that application,
the kernel will actually take
advantage of the fact that it knows,
and is able... is able to effectively
read ahead and do additional work
to make the process of loading
the application a lot faster.
That's for the launching
of an application.
When actually running an application,
there's a... what we
call a working set cache,
where basically an application's,
you know, set of hot pages that are
being used to execute the
application are kept track of.
And when you swap between, you know,
or context switch between
multiple applications,
the kernel will actually... the
kernel will actually be very smart,
again, about being able to try and keep,
you know, the right things in memory,
so you're not spending a lot of time
reading and writing process state.
And, of course, again,
there's this kind of caching
process... or the... being able
to do read-aheads and other
types of collective IO behavior.
In the P-threads environment,
which affects certainly most of
the threading models that most of
the application environments use,
we've added per-thread signal capability,
and added a number of... a number
of additional P-threads APIs to
kind of fill out the POSIX,
you know, compatibility suite.
One thing to mention,
if you happen to be someone who
is developing in the kernel,
we have, you know,
there's a lot of things
that we've learned in the
process of shipping Mac OS X.
And one area where we've spent quite a
bit of effort is in designing I/O Kit,
really making sure that
there's an excellent,
well-defined environment for developing
drivers and other IO-related services,
and make sure that we can
provide forward compatibility
as we move the system forward.
We'll talk more about
I/O Kit in a few minutes.
Elsewhere in the kernel,
on the other hand, is a different story.
We're constantly evolving the kernel,
and a lot of work that
we've done in Jaguar,
in fact, has been a lot of upgrading and
adding new plumbing in the kernel.
And we've worked real hard to
try and make sure that we keep
everything within the kernel
environment as compatible as possible.
But we're going to change in the future.
If you're going to develop in the kernel,
make sure you develop,
realize that you're kind of
doing it at your own risk,
the in-kernel APIs and services
that exist there will change.
And we're going to be introducing
new APIs over time that we'll be able
to say you can have comfort with.
But outside of the I/O Kit space,
we really advise that you don't
develop stuff within the kernel.
You absolutely have to.
And if you do, come talk with us.
Let's develop a relationship
through developer relations to
make sure that we can work with
you from release to release.
If you're interested in developing
in the kernel or getting more
information on the kernel,
there's a number of
sessions you want to go to.
The Darwin kernel session will go
over both Mac and BSD pieces of
the system in a lot more detail.
There's also a session on Wednesday for
managing kernel extensions.
If you're doing I/O Kit work or
other things within the kernel,
it's really important
you go to this session.
There's a lot of useful
information there.
And if you're interested in more
data on Pthreads and other threading
services that exist in Mac OS X,
make sure you go to the Writing Threaded
Apps session on Thursday.
Moving on to I/O Kit.
I/O Kit provides basically an
object-oriented framework for
making the process of writing device
drivers as easy as possible and
handling a lot of the common services
and facilities that people who write
device drivers need to deal with.
Things such as driver matching,
when you plug in a device,
making sure that the right driver
actually ends up getting launched
and loaded into the kernel.
And handling things like power management
and kernel-to-user communication between
a device and some higher-level service
that may need access to a given device.
Within I/O Kit,
there's a couple of different layers.
Just to make sure the terms
are clear to everybody,
we've kind of broken this up because
it's an object-oriented implementation.
There's this concept of families,
which provide the protocol specifics.
It allows you to make sure that
the interfaces and services...
and things like that are
appropriate to the kind of device.
An audio device, for example,
is going to behave and have different
requirements than a disk device.
And so the families provide the APIs and
services that are device-appropriate.
The actual device drivers themselves
end up talking to the family directly.
That's kind of its
interface to the world,
and the family ends up generally
talking to the rest of the system.
Within I/O Kit for Jaguar,
there's a number of things
that were done there,
particularly the KEX system,
which is the kernel
extension environment.
It's basically the set of facilities
used to load things into the kernel
to be able to handle linking all
the bits and pieces together.
When we shipped 10.1,
we were focusing primarily on
making sure the mechanism was there.
There's a lot of work that's been
done in Jaguar in terms of making
additional services available for you,
the developer.
You want to go to the KEX management
session later in the week to learn a
lot more about what those things are.
There's tools for debugging and
tracking things and logging stuff that
you'll find to be particularly helpful.
As Steve mentioned this morning,
as part of our tools work for Jaguar,
we've upgraded to GCC3.
One thing you should
probably note is GCC3's C++.
ABI is actually different
than what shipped in Mac OS X.
The good news is that this is
something that the I/O Kit team
really considered from the get-go.
If you have existing drivers
that ship today under 10.1,
under the old 2.7, 2.97 compiler,
I/O Kit automatically handles
the patch-up and keeps everything
so that it's binary compatible,
it's upward compatible.
It is important to note that if you write
a device... ... driver on Jaguar later,
that it will not be backwards compatible.
That's something to factor into
your development processes.
One other area of enhancement within
I/O Kit is the power management system.
There's been a lot of tweaking
there in terms of trying
to get better battery life.
to try and get better behavior and
stuff in different power conditions.
And in particular, being able to handle
multiple power states.
So being able to have different settings,
if you will, for how the system behaves
when it's plugged into the wall
versus when it's just on battery.
And support for UPSs.
And one way I believe someone kind of
described it to me is the UPS support
is basically the ability to add the
battery capability to your desktop.
So the behavior of the power
management system is very,
very similar.
Once the UPS kind of goes
into battery mode and actually
notifies the system such,
then it effectively behaves like
a very large portable in terms
of its power management behavior.
The HID manager,
the Human Input Device Manager,
has also been enhanced with I/O Kit.
And in particular, again,
a number of developer facilities,
but trying to get more of the various
devices all integrated into one
place so that the HID manager is now
responsible for mice as HID devices,
as well as all the special game pads
and all that kind of stuff that the
HID manager was responsible before.
As you heard this morning,
Steve mentioned we have some directions.
We'll hear more about that next week
as far as servers are concerned,
but there's a lot of work that
IOKit's put into making sure that
we can support headless booting.
If you happen to be someone who makes
graphics cards or things like that,
one thing to factor in here is that
it's really important to be able
to have an environment like this,
dynamic discovery of graphics devices.
That's something that the current
NDRV models don't really support.
That's one thing you basically
go out and look for a display,
and if it's not there, it stops.
If you happen to be a graphics vendor,
you really want to look at making
sure that you look at using native
graphics drivers on Mac OS X to
be able to take full advantage of
headless and dynamic display detection.
Lastly, there's been quite a bit of
work done in the PC card family.
There was some stuff that came out
as part of some of the software
updates that you may have seen,
additional PC card devices.
With a Mac OS X and Jaguar,
we also have a UI for now
being able to make sure you
can see what devices are there.
If you want to remove one,
you can effectively pull down
a menu from the menu bar and,
if you will, eject,
although they don't physically
eject at this point.
Number of sessions related to
IO you might want to go to.
The Managing Kernel Extensions is
probably the single most important one.
If you're developing
in the kernel at all,
developing device drivers, things,
please go to this session.
A lot of good stuff there.
And then there's FireWire and
USB sessions later in the week as well.
File Systems The file system
portion of Mac OS X is a
subsystem of the BSD Kernel.
It's basically based on a VFS,
standard BSD VFS architecture,
although we've enhanced it a bit to be
able to support things like UTF-8 and
other services that HFS+, for example,
tends to export.
We support a number of
different file system types:
HFS, HFS+, UFS, ISO, etc., etc., WebDAV,
which is a web-based
file system architecture,
UDAF, Andrew File System,
I believe somebody has ported out there.
All the interfaces to the
file system were designed
to be able to support UTF-8,
so for internationalized file names.
But I think one thing important to
mention about the file system is that
there's intentionally no specific
affinity to any specific file system.
The file system is designed
to be able to deal with any
kind of file system plugged in.
We actually run and test
on UFS within Apple.
We don't depend on the
fact that it has to be HFS.
One of the things that I think
Steve mentioned this morning was when
you're living in a networked world,
you really don't know what's
on the end of that wire.
So you have to make sure that
you can run on the lowest
common denominator file system.
From the file system architecture,
we do not make any particular
affinity to any of the file systems.
Obviously,
we think HFS+ is the best choice,
but I think it's important as
you're looking at implementing
things that depend on the file
system not to make assumptions about
what the underlying file system
capabilities and architectures are.
There are APIs to help you with this.
The file system is also
responsible for enforcing the
file system security policy,
basically making sure that there's
a concept of ownership on the
entities that are on the disk.
in reinforcing that with the rest
of the Unix security policies.
From the standpoint of what
we've been doing in file systems,
I think one important thing
to note is with Jaguar,
we now support up to 15 terabytes
for an HFS Plus file system.
We also have done quite a
bit of work with WebDAV,
which is our web
What's used for iDisk,
if you happen to use iDisk,
or if you happen to be
working with web servers,
it's a common protocol for being
able to get file access for that.
We spent quite a bit of work working on
performance and improving authentication,
particularly adding digest
authentication to the system.
For the file sharing level,
we've added Samba,
which is basically SMB file sharing
capability in the desktop system.
So, in addition to you being able
to turn on personal file sharing
and be able to share like you
would with another Mac user,
you can now turn on personal file sharing
and be able to share with a Windows user.
And that's by actually having a Samba
server as part of the desktop system.
We support SMB browsing in
various authentication forms now.
There's built-in support now
for quotas within the file
system for HFS and UFS and such.
We have some particularly interesting
new technology around auto-mounting.
If you've ever had a chance to
work with NFS auto-mounting,
it's an interesting concept of
basically where you have a file system
that's an area within your file system
that's designated as being where
your network file services exist.
And the file services don't
actually get mounted until such
time as you traverse the path,
if you will, where that particular file.
system is, quote unquote,
"mounted on." It's what's
called auto-mounting.
And we've enhanced Jaguar to be
able to support that for a number
of different file system types.
So,
in addition to typical NFS auto-mounting,
we also now support this for
Apple share and SMB volumes.
And so it's basically possible just
going through your file system of live
navigating file servers that exist
in your network and being able to
mount them just by accessing a path.
Our UDF file system has been enhanced
to support read/write support now.
Another key, important performance win is
being able to remount remote
file systems asynchronously.
It's basically done
in the background now.
If you happen to be on a
slow network connection,
mounting a web dev volume or
something like that over modem,
you don't have to sit there
while the connection occurs.
That actually occurs
in the background now.
on to the networking part of the system.
Networking is also a
subsystem of the BSD Kernel.
As part of the BSD Kernel,
it's basically built
on the 4.4 Lite code.
A while back, however,
we spent quite a bit of time syncing
it up with a fairly recent version.
And with Jaguar,
we've actually brought the
networking stack all the way up
to being synced with FreeBSD 4.4.
It's a socket-based API.
This is the native networking
APIs and services for the system.
And if you want to get the most value,
this is kind of the level you should
be working at or through Carbon and
Cocoa-level appropriate APIs.
Kind of key important features
for our networking stack
include multi-homing support,
routing, firewall, NAT mechanisms,
network address translation capabilities.
And with Jaguar,
a built-in support for IPv6.
And I think a really key differentiator
between us and the rest of the Unix
community in that respect is how we
deal with configuration for networking.
Being able to support
mobile environments,
being able to support environments
where you may have a lot of
dynamicism in your networking state,
that auto-configuration and
auto-reconfiguration is a really key
part of our networking architecture.
And we'll talk more about
that in just a moment.
As I mentioned,
part of the Jaguar work is syncing
up with the latest FreeBSD.
But I think one probably more
important issue in terms of really
new features is the support for IPv6.
So with Jaguar,
v6 is built into the system.
It's something you can
start taking advantage of.
There are actually very appropriate
APIs that you can be using in your
applications if you're not using
a high-level abstraction to make
sure that you don't limit yourself
to just IPv4 connection capability.
And there's a session later in the week
I'll mention in a moment which will tell
you a bit about some of those new APIs.
But it is possible to write
your applications such that you
can run on both IPv6 and IPv4.
IPsec is also now part of the system.
What I think it's important
to note with IPsec is that
it's an enabling technology.
This is something that if
you're interested in using,
one of the tasks as a developer
is actually developing the key
management and the key exchange for
whatever it is you're talking to on
the other end of the IPsec connection.
That's not something that
we have built into Jaguar.
This is something that is typically
very application-specific.
Again, you can learn a little bit more
about that later in the week.
As part of our PPP support,
we now also have point-to-point
tunneling protocol,
the VPN solution that's used
within the Windows environment,
and there's a client application that's
included with Jaguar to support that.
I think probably one thing
that was really understated in
this morning's keynote was the
work that we're doing on LDAP.
Basically,
we are going through a process of
transitioning to LDAP being our
primary directory services model.
You may have heard quite a
lot about NetInfo and stuff.
That is a term we use to describe
our low-level network information
services within Mac OS X.
But with Jaguar,
one thing that's occurring
is that LDAP is becoming
the wire protocol of choice.
If you're dealing with environments
that already have LDAP,
we have LDAP client support, so LDAPv3.
In the server, we actually support LDAP.
As part of the server product.
Basically, you'll see for wire protocol
purposes that NetInfo is something
that we're phasing out with Jaguar,
and that LDAP is something
that we are embracing very,
very strongly.
Another key feature that is
rolled in is SNMP support.
If you're dealing in a
network-managed environment,
you'll find having SNMP to
be particularly helpful.
Part of our round-out,
some of the other capabilities of the
networking stack is our NetBoot story.
With Mac OS X-1,
we supported NetBoot of Mac OS 9 clients.
For the Jaguar release,
we support NetBooting of
Mac OS X clients and the ability
to support multiple NetBoot images.
You may have a lab of machines for a
school where you still have some older
machines that need to boot Mac OS 9,
and newer machines
that can boot Mac OS X.
The server side of this will actually
support multiple NetBoot images
to be able to support multiple
client kinds of environments.
I think probably the most important
thing that we've done in terms
of networking is Rendezvous.
Rendezvous is really some
incredible technology.
It's basically brought the
ease of Apple Talk to TCP/IP.
One of the advantages of Apple Talk was
that you could very quickly take a
couple of machines or a machine and
a printer or whatever and just plug
them together and it would just work.
That's the kind of experience
you want people to have when
they're dealing with networking.
Rendezvous manages to bring
this forward using standard
TCP/IP solutions to be able to
implement those kinds of capabilities.
It's even better than that because
the way it does it is much more
efficient and much more capable.
It's what we like to call
zero configuration networking.
It's based off some open standards
called ZeroConf that's part of the IETF.
There's a number of working
groups and things like that
that we've been working with.
Rendezvous has a couple of
three different key layers.
There's the zero configuration
networking piece.
You've probably seen a lot of
this already even in Mac OS 9
or in today's shipping Mac OS X.
When you plug into an environment
where there is no DNS server,
when you have DHCP enabled,
it just picks a number for you.
It's picking that number out of
a well-defined range that's used.
It's called a link local address.
This is kind of the first baby steps,
if you will,
of being able to support zero
configuration networking,
of being able to make sure
that the system can communicate
even when there isn't network
infrastructure around to support you.
The other key piece is the support
for being able to actually have
services being referenced by name.
This is built on some
technology called multicast DNS.
Basically, the concept is that when you
send out a DNS request today
on a conventional network,
you're actually talking to
some well-known DNS server
within your environment.
The multicast DNS that's part
of Rendezvous actually sends
out a multicast request,
and the devices themselves respond
if they recognize their name.
It's like calling to somebody you know,
Hi, Dean, and Dean goes, Oh, yeah,
that's me, and responds.
It's very much the same
concept here with devices,
where it's possible to send out
a request by name for something,
and the device says, Oh, yeah, that's me.
Here's how you talk to me.
Here's my IP address.
This all kind of rolls
up into this concept,
because it's rolled into DNS,
of being able to effectively
have services registered and go
through this process of discovery.
I'll show you an example
of that in a moment.
This capability,
though it works incredibly
well in the small kind of ad
hoc networking environment,
has a big benefit over AppleTalk,
I think,
in that it's considerably more scalable,
because it's built on DNS as
its way of being able to access
services and discover them,
that you can actually,
in a large corporate environment,
use an existing DNS infrastructure,
to be able to publish all
the services and capabilities
that you have in your system.
The systems don't have to
necessarily respond individually.
In fact, you just use your existing
DNS infrastructure to be
able to take advantage of it.
Like I said, I'll try and show you a
little bit here in a moment.
obvious examples of using Rendezvous.
What you saw this morning,
the cool iTunes demo,
where you could effectively
just get applications that can
spontaneously share information.
That's a very interesting example.
Basically, you should think of any
number of circumstances.
iPhoto might be another one where
you might want to share pictures.
In situations where you'd really
like it to be easy for people to
very easily exchange information
is something where Rendezvous
really plays a real enabling role.
Peer-to-peer laptops is another one.
If you happen to meet your friend
in the local coffee house or the bus
stop outside or something like that,
you'd really like an airport connection
to be just the fact that the two machines
are within proximity of each other,
that you should be able
to share files very easily
without having to do anything.
That's, again, the key concepts that
are driving Rendezvous.
Headless devices are
another good example.
Obviously,
if you don't end up having a display
on a particular machine or some device,
it gets very difficult to be able
to go in there and configure up the
IP address and all the various services.
Again,
Rendezvous can play a role where it
can discover that particular device
and immediately be able to talk to it.
Of course,
we'd rather assume that someone will
come up with some other cool thing,
some gadget or some other thing that
can really take advantage of Rendezvous.
With that,
I'd like to do a real quick demo.
Hey, we're up.
So the first one is we've-- actually,
the engineers,
I threw out at them last week, gee,
I'd really like to have
something to show these guys.
It's interesting to talk about,
but it's always better to be able to see.
And so they ran down to Fry's and
picked up one of these cameras.
There happened to be a little web camera.
It's got a--
Thank you for joining me.
I'm going to go ahead and start
off with a quick question.
I'm going to start off
with a quick question.
One of the things that I've
been thinking about is,
as you mentioned, the web browser,
the browser that you
use to go to a browser,
how do you do that?
What's the IP address?
How do I do this?
The experience for something like
this should really end up being
just being able to go to a browser.
And be able to just select the device.
In this particular case,
the camera happens to be exporting
HTTP as one of its protocols.
In Rendezvous,
it's important to note it's not
just for sharing files or for
one particular set of services.
It's for any kind of service
that you can imagine.
And things like web servers can actually
publish themselves as being available.
And this particular one's been set
up so that we can do exactly that.
And if I go to this little browser, well,
poof, there it is.
There's my device.
Just shows up on the little browser.
And I can just click on it and connect.
Well,
the advantage of this is basically that,
as you can see here, it should be live,
that getting to be able to
connect to this device is really
just a matter of being able to
have it discovered in a browser.
Just like if you use
the chooser on Mac OS 9,
that I can go and select the
kind of device I'm interested in,
that it shows up.
I can click on it and use it.
And that's the kind of
experience that I've been having.
And I've been able to do that.
And that's the kind of experience
that we really want to see for
devices that connect to a Macintosh.
The other good example is printing.
The kind of experience you
expect with printing is,
again, like with AppleTalk,
you want to be able to
just discover the printer.
I think what we'll do is we'll do
just a real quick little demo of that.
Let's see.
We need somebody's name so
you believe this is real.
What's your name?
David.
Okay.
Great.
So, sorry.
So with this, you know, you've all seen,
kind of seen the Mac OS X print
panel capability.
It comes up and then you select,
to go select your printer, and, gee,
the printer's not there.
Hmm.
Oh, it's not plugged in.
So, you know, with the, you know,
the kind of experience
you get when you get,
you know, the printer out of the box is,
you know,
really what you'd like to see is that
you just plug the darn thing into the,
you know,
into the printer and the cable in
and you go back over and hopefully,
oh.
It just showed up.
I think the real power of this
is what happens here is that as
soon as the device is detected,
that it publishes itself
as being a service.
And that service immediately gets
broadcast to the print center.
The print center says, oh,
there's a printer here.
There's only one.
Well, here's the one you want.
And let's go off and just print that
so you believe that it truly works.
And again, the experience should be
plug it in and it works.
And that's the kind of experience
we want to see on the system.
For printers,
for things like web devices,
for web servers,
if you're administrating other machines,
for file sharing services,
for other things like that.
And sure enough, that's David.
So anyway,
I think the real key with Rendezvous
is to try and create that just plug
and play capability with network-based
devices and services on the system.
And it's not limited, again,
just printers.
But kind of anything you
can imagine with an iTunes,
I think,
being a really good concept demo.
So let me go back to slides.
So for the networking
portion of the system,
there's a number of sessions
you might want to go to.
There's a networking overview on Tuesday,
an advanced one which will get
into the IPv6 and IPsec and some of
the other key pieces on Thursday.
Zero Configuration Networking,
if you want to learn more about ZeroConf,
this is the session to go to.
They'll have a number of demos show
you the code or calls that you can
make to actually use this stuff.
And by the way,
the example I gave was using,
this is a stock Jaguar system,
just the same as the CDs that you have.
So you can be able to play with being
able to put together little toys and
things like that yourself very quickly.
One thing about ZeroConf,
the Zero Configuration
Networking and Rendezvous,
is that the APIs and services that
you need to access within your
application are incredibly small.
It's a very,
very simple thing to integrate.
If you're interested in learning more
about our LDAP support and our general
strategy for directory services,
that's on Thursday.
And then there's a feedback
forum on Friday afternoon.
So the BSD application environment.
This is kind of where the power
of UNIX kind of comes into play.
This is the command line.
Basically all the application
level APIs and services and tools
that really give it the UNIX feel.
So the LS and CP and all the kinds of
standard things that you would think of.
All the daemons that run in the system,
the daemons that run in are
typically BSD applications,
if you will, that run.
Things like LDAP.
LDAP is just open LDAP, freely available.
Apache Web Server and things like that.
These are all just standard
UNIX services that run as part of
the BSD application environment.
One thing that's kind of neat
about a Mac with UNIX is that
you can't do that on a Linux box.
Being able to play your iTunes
and have cool graphics and
a lot of the other stuff.
As you can see here,
an example is X Windows support
and a number of other things.
Being able to have this kind
of capability on a desktop and
portable system that's available
to everybody is really cool.
I think one of the real powers
of Mac OS X is the fact that
this kind of power sits under the
hood and that you can actually
be a geek and be proud of it.
So what's new in the BSD environment?
Well, one key thing is we've
synced up with FreeBSD 4.4.
We've spent quite a lot of work to try
and bring a number of libraries and other
services and things like that up to date.
So if you're using our
reporting code over,
you'll find that we've done a lot of
things to update that environment.
Bash is now the primary
shell on the system.
Those that like the shells,
we figured that would be the response.
Python is now included
as part of the system.
We have a new BSD SDK package that's
part of the developer tool set.
And these are APIs that we really don't
advise you writing new applications with.
But if you're porting an
application from a UNIX environment,
these are kind of the SDK tools
that you probably need to
be able to port those apps.
Things like OpenSSL, LibEdit, et cetera,
et cetera.
Again,
we don't encourage people using these
libraries and services when you're
writing a new app from scratch.
But if you're porting something,
we've been trying to make sure that
you have a good collection of tools
in your tool bag to kind of ease
the process of porting to Mac OS X.
We've also, as part of Jaguar,
kind of rolled in the latest
versions of Apache and Perl and
Emacs and the various kinds of tools.
Lots of new and updated man pages.
We were very weak in the
man page space before.
Thank you.
So put a lot of work into trying
getting a lot more of those set.
We're working,
continuing to work on that.
I think the other important
thing is that we've...
[Transcript missing]
Thank you.
And there's support now for
a split window scroll back,
so you can have your active window
and be able to look at the scroll
back information in case you're
trying to track a problem in a
build or something like that.
And a number of real-time
preferences and things like that,
so you can change the behavior
of your terminal windows a
little bit more effectively.
So if you get a chance to with Jaguar
playing with the new terminal app,
let us know how you like it.
For those of you that are
kind of the UNIX developers
coming to the Mac platform,
I'd really encourage you to go to the
Mac OS X overview for UNIX developers.
Again, this kind of gives you the
Mac OS X perspective from assuming
that you're coming from a UNIX world.
And if you're looking at
porting UNIX apps to Mac OS X,
just in general,
we have another session also tomorrow,
which will help a lot on how
do you bring an app over,
what's our build environment,
what's different.
If you're porting something from one
of the BSDs or something like that,
what's involved?
Moving on to security.
This is part of the OS framework
layer of the system.
Our policy on security
is first and foremost,
let's ship a system that's
as secure as we can,
and if you want,
you can enable services if you need them.
That way,
mom doesn't have to become an expert
at becoming a security administrator.
That should never have to be the case.
So I think one important thing from
our philosophy is that when we're
dealing with security in Mac OS X,
that we really like to think of
things as being secure out of the box,
unlike most of the other systems,
which is everything's turned on,
and if you want to make it secure,
you go through a very long list
of steps to secure up your system.
Another key part of our security
layer and infrastructure,
though,
is that we clearly need to be able
to work with the rest of the world,
and there isn't any one particular
solution for security and authentication.
So our security infrastructure is
designed to be very configurable,
very much based on standards,
and basically provide a whole...
a whole series of libraries
and services to really try and
allow you to integrate security
capabilities within your applications.
And so a lot of the services
that exist are kind of designed
with these concepts in mind.
Of course, there's the keychain,
which is very much an ease-of-use
capability of our security system,
single, basically the ability to remember
common logins and to kind of keep them
all together in one secured place.
Encrypted disk images is a kind of...
it's certainly a high-level feature,
but it's kind of an important thing if
you happen to have one of the little
USB dongles or things like that,
being able to put an encrypted disk image
and keep all your important information.
Even if it gets stolen, you know,
they can't get to the contents.
Within the actual services of the
security frameworks is a set of
capabilities for being able to
support pluggable authentication.
And for Jaguar in particular,
this has now been integrated
into the login window.
So from the login window,
if you have... Kerberos enabled,
you have a single login to be able
to support Kerberos environments,
as well as other kinds of
login authentication solutions,
such as smart cards or
other kinds of things.
It's a pluggable model to be
able to support multiple kinds
of authentication solutions.
Another key service of the
security system is being able
to do certificate management.
And there's... it's one of the
key new features for Jaguar,
and there's a session later
this week on that I'll mention,
and then there's secure transport,
which is really our answer to OpenSSL.
And I'll talk about more of
that in just a moment as well.
So like I said, we've integrated Kerberos
now into the system.
There's support within mail and FTP and
login and a number of system services
to support Kerberos throughout.
It's not just kind of an add-on thing.
We've been working with
the folks at MIT on this.
They've been great partners to work with.
We basically have integrated
Kerberos for Macintosh 4.5,
which has Kerberos v4 and v5 support.
Again, this is integrated into a number
of the other services that exist.
If you happen to be in
a Kerberos environment,
you'll find this to be really helpful.
I mentioned PAM already,
but it's worth restating that these two
environments actually work together,
both at the UNIX level and at
the high-level application level,
that you have one consistent set
of behaviors that occurs as far
as authentication is concerned.
If you're porting a UNIX app
and it's PAM-enabled,
you'll fit right in.
And then I want to spend a moment
and talk a little bit about CDSA and
particularly secure transport.
CDSA is the
Common Data Security Architecture that's
basically the
key framework for security libraries.
CDSA provides services for
encryption and authentication.
It's an incredibly rich set of services.
It's based on an open standard
that is managed by the open group.
And the CDSA code is
actually something that we,
in addition to the rest of Darwin,
open sourced a while ago.
So it's basically very much a
key part of the system for being
able to handle authentication.
But what's important about CDSA is
it's much like our file system,
has no particular affinity.
The same thing applies to CDSA.
It has no specific affinity to
a given authentication model
or a specific encryption.
Its job, in fact,
is to be able to provide
kind of the abstraction.
For those kinds of things.
And the advantage of that
is that as things improve,
and boy,
there's a lot of stuff happening now
with smart cards and other types of
environments that exist out there,
that CDSA is our way to be able to make
sure that we can continue to plug into
these different types of environments.
And is what we recommend people
use when they need to be able to do
encryption and authentication services.
A prime example of this is OpenSSL.
OpenSSL is one of these very
well-known open source solutions.
It's one of the best solutions
for being able to have
secure sockets communication.
Like for a web browser
or something like that.
And it's actually a very good solution.
It does an excellent job.
But where it falls down is that it's
kind of implemented in one solution.
It has no certificate management in it.
It has no way of being able
to support like a smart card
authentication or other things.
And if you write an
application using OpenSSL,
well, you probably can get a great
connection to your web server.
But if you ever want to improve,
if the encryption technologies improve,
or if you ever end up having new
authentication solutions that
you want to be able to support,
OpenSSL won't handle that for you.
And that's where secure transport
and CDSA come into play.
We're really trying to work, in fact,
with the open source community to promote
CDSA as really the better solution.
And kind of are working with
that community at large.
Since CDSA is also open source,
we think it's a much
better long-term solution.
And then another key set of
security services for Jaguar
are certificate management.
We've done, again,
there's a lot of work here,
support for X509 and various
UI services and stuff for being able
to support for both Carbon and Cocoa.
Basically to try and make sure that
if you're in an environment where
you're dealing with certificates,
that you can more adequately
be able to support them.
And then there's
sessions later this week.
Whoops.
There's sessions later this week.
There's a lot of sessions later this
week that'll go into more how to
take advantage of these capabilities.
So one thing about security before we
move on is packaging your products.
One of the things that I've noticed as a
user of Mac OS X is that many times folks
who are writing the software or porting
it to Mac OS X forget about the fact
that it's a multi-user operating system.
One of the things I encourage
you to try is make sure that
when you install an app,
your applications,
and you're working on your installers,
that you make sure you
install it as one user,
log out, log in as another user,
and try and make sure that the
app still works and behaves
and was installed correctly.
When you're in a home environment,
the parents most likely will
install some application,
and then they want the kid to
be able to log in and use it,
potentially, or not.
But it's a... You want to make sure
that if you intended your app to
work for everybody on the computer,
that it truly does.
So always remember that it's, you know,
down at the base of Mac OS X,
it's a multi-user OS.
Test and make sure your
installs work that way.
File system issues are
another big item that we,
you know, see a lot as an issue.
Particularly file system
ownership is very important.
You want to make sure
that that app you install,
again,
if you're intended to be able to be
used by other people on the computer,
that the ownership,
and of the file is such that it's
possible that somebody other than
who installed it can execute it.
And that permissions are
really even more important.
This is an opportunity,
unfortunately a very bad opportunity
that people have of being able to
create security holes in the system.
Make sure that your executables
aren't world writable.
And it's amazing how
many of those we've seen.
Or worse yet, that you have an executable
that set UID root.
In other words,
it effectively has complete
privileges on the system,
and is also, you know, world writable.
You know, this is bad.
You really need to be thinking about
security when you're packaging apps.
Not just how your app uses
the system in a secure way,
but how you actually deliver it to
your customer is really important.
And it's something that's really
different with X than it was with IX.
And I encourage you to spend a few
extra moments to think about that.
In addition,
and we talk about set UID applications,
or applications that effectively say
that they have to be root in order to be
able to use the services in the system.
99% of the time that's not true.
There are ways to get to
the services that you need,
most likely.
We can help you with that.
Instead of doing something horrible,
like making a potential security
hole for yourself and for your users,
come talk to us.
The authentication, you know, frameworks,
the security framework
has a bunch of ways that,
you know,
will support being able to access the
system in much more controlled ways.
There are other services
that can help you.
If you really need that,
maybe it's something that we need to
add a service in the system for you.
We really want to discourage
people from being able,
from, you know, shipping applications
that require set UID.
And even internal to Apple, we've,
you know, really kind of brought down,
you know, the gauntlet on our own
internal development.
Because it's a, you know,
strict rule to really limit the set
UID apps that are in the system.
They are a real opportunity for trouble.
So for security,
if you're interested in learning more,
there's an authorization
session on Wednesday.
The CDSA and secure transport,
if you're doing anything that
you're using OpenSSL for now,
go to that session.
You really want to be using
CDSA and secure transport.
There's also a session on
certificates and certificate
management and UI on Thursday,
and a whole session on Kerberos,
if you're involved in that.
And there's also a dedicated
feedback forum for security.
So, the vector and math libraries.
These are also part of my organization,
CoreOS.
It's one of those things
that may not be as visible,
but this has such an impact on
the performance of the system.
The capabilities of iMovie and iTunes
and things are all built on the
vector and math libraries we have.
Basically,
they are a set of highly tuned,
both vector and AlteVec,
or vector rather,
AlteVec-tuned libraries,
as well as scalar math libraries.
And there's a set of libraries
for doing things like DSP,
the VBLAS, the basic linear algebra,
and a number of other libraries
that are in the system.
If you're doing anything where
you're doing data transformations
or you're really trying to
take advantage of the AlteVec,
chances are you can probably...
You can probably do it using these
libraries without having to go
in and do your own vector code.
With Jaguar,
there's a lot of work that the team put
into and LibM or the math library V5 to
make them just absolutely top-notch fast,
and as well as making sure that
they're IEEE 754 and C99 compliant.
There's additional features that
were added to the BLAS library,
specifically double and single precision
and real and complex data types,
and additional VDSP services,
double precision fast
Fourier transforms and 2D FFTs and such.
If you're doing, again,
things where you're doing a lot
of DSP work or things like that,
you want to check these things out.
Just to throw a slide here
from a performance standpoint,
this team is really proud of the
work that they do in terms of
performance on the vector engine
and the vectorization libraries.
And for good reason.
They're getting 2x performance
on a number of these libraries.
If you look, this is a 1 GHz G4 machine
versus a 2.2 GHz P4,
and we're still getting
twice the performance.
That's pretty incredible.
Again, some great stuff there.
So if you're doing a lot of work
that uses the vector engine,
make sure you check out these libraries.
There's a whole session on the velocity
engine and performance optimization
on Tuesday I encourage you to go to.
Now one thing that may not have been
clear is that all of the technology,
for the most part, with some exceptions,
but with most of the technology
within the Core OS or Darwin,
is actually all open source.
Open source is something that
we initiated as a key kind of
strategic drive for operating system
technology a couple of years ago.
And Darwin's been around
for a little while now.
Apple's very serious about
open source technology.
We leverage the open source community,
but more importantly,
we make sure that the whole core of
Mac OS X is available as open source.
And we're the only company
of our type that is actively,
you know, depending on open sources as
a key part of their commercial
business solution in this way,
and working with the community, in fact,
and making sure that this works.
It's important to note that
we use the term Darwin and
Core OS completely interchangeably,
because they are the same.
We open source the whole core.
You can go out and build the
Core OS of Mac OS X and actually slip,
you know, your own built version under a
shipping version of the system.
We don't encourage you to
do that with your customers,
because you get to support it.
But I know it's something
that technically is possible,
and it will allow you to actually
go in and work with the technology
that's part of the system.
And more importantly,
participate in evolving
it and developing it.
There's a number of projects that are
supported in our open source efforts,
not only Darwin, the core of Mac OS X,
but the Darwin streaming server,
basically the streaming technology,
what you affectionately know as
the QuickTime streaming server
that was released a while ago,
but in the open source community,
it's known as the
Darwin streaming server.
That's been ported to a
number of different platforms.
OpenPlay, which is a kind of network
abstraction for network gameplay.
The CDSA framework that I talked
about a few moments ago.
And Hederdoc, which is basically source
code documentation,
and the open source application tools.
So please come be part of
our open source efforts.
There's a handful of new initiatives
we have around open source.
One is, we just launched last week with
the Internet Software Consortium,
opendarwin.org,
and it's basically a way for
even more people to participate
in our open source activities.
It's basically not controlled by Apple.
We've basically helped get this set up,
and have been kind of
helping with the process,
but are really trying to make sure that
there's a way for people to participate
in our open source activities.
There's a way for community
involvement and the community to really
drive the open source activities.
Our Darwin,
the opensource.apple.com is still,
and Darwin is still the reference
open source platform and drop,
the source code drop,
but the opendarwin initiative allows
even more people to participate.
And there's a couple of new
projects that are now part of
our open source initiative.
Open Directory, so all our directory
services infrastructure.
There's now been open source,
as well as CUPS,
the common Unix printing system.
So with all this,
there's actually been a huge amount of
progress by the open source community.
A lot of stuff that we've
actually got in Jaguar,
particularly things we've upgraded
as far as in the UNIX space,
has been as a result of our
collaboration with that.
A lot of people have been
contributing directly.
But there's also been people
who have been porting some
interesting stuff to the platform.
As you might see here,
OpenOffice has recently
been ported to Mac OS X.
We'll talk a lot more about open source
and the initiatives and how you can get
involved in the infrastructure and all
that kind of stuff tomorrow afternoon at
the open source Apple and You session.
Come join us.
So a few last thoughts.
We spent a bit of time just
giving an overview of the Core OS.
The purpose is you know
what the technologies are,
you know what's underneath the covers,
but you should always develop to the
highest level abstraction you can.
Try to avoid using the low level APIs and
services unless you absolutely have to.
There are great abstractions for a lot
of these things in Carbon and Cocoa,
but many times there are things that
you can only get to through getting
access to lower levels of the system.
And I think it's important to know
what the building blocks are because it
does impact the behavior of the system.
Remember,
Carbon and Cocoa and all the rest
of the environments are all built
on top of these foundations,
so fundamentally you know
what's at the bottom and there's
the source to all of that,
the stuff at the bottom that
you can see in case you really
want to know how it works.
[Transcript missing]
So one last set of pointers
off to some other sessions.
We have this developing for
performance session on Friday.
This will be a great session,
strongly encouraged.
There's a feedback forum for all of the
Darwin technologies Wednesday afternoon,
the security feedback forum, of course,
on Thursday, and the networking
feedback forum on Friday.
You can get a hold of me if
there's something that comes up as
far as the Core OS is concerned.